Add web login authentication workshop (#1303)
hackclub/hackclub: workshops/login_auth/README.md

---
name: 'Web Login Authentication'
description: 'Build a secure web login page using Firebase'
author: '@tanishq-soni'
---

# Web Login Authentication 🔒

In this workshop, you'll build a secure web login page using [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/).

You will make something like this 👇

![live gif](https://cloud-7782l8k04.vercel.app/loginv2.gif)

[Check out this demo of the final product!](https://loginauth-12.web.app)

You can test out the demo site using the following credentials:

- EMAIL-`login@authentication.com`
- Password - `password`

> ## Getting Started :rocket:

Reviewer: Nope, emojis will not be rendered—it’ll be exactly as written

After successfully creating the Firebase project you will see your project console.

At project console's landing page you will see `Get started by adding Firebase to your app` and below that you will see three options of integrations:
1. iOS
2. Android
3. </> (this option is for web on which you are working, So click on that).

![Project Console](https://cloud-l7pn8f9e9.vercel.app/6.png)

After clicking on that a new page will pop up and ask you for a nickname of your project, So give one as I am giving it `login-auth` and click on register app.

![App nickname](https://cloud-8tdv8wfuj.vercel.app/8.png)

Then you will see some sort of JavaScript code, So don't worry about that, It is the code which contains some keys like API Key, Domain key which helps your Firebase project to connect with your webpage, and for that, you need to save this code or just copy/paste into the notes as it will require in coding part later.

Also, include below two lines with the above code.

```javascript
<script src="https://www.gstatic.com/firebasejs/7.19.1/firebase-app.js"></script>
```
```javascript
<script src="https://www.gstatic.com/firebasejs/4.8.1/firebase.js"></script>

> ```

Author: yeaa it's not necessary, but it works with some code and don't too. :/ so that's why I suggested that!

> ```

Author: i removed it.!

![Add user](https://cloud-kbxm635o2.vercel.app/13.png)

Then click on `Add User` and add `Email` and `Password` for that user and click `Add User`.

![Save user](https://cloud-l38zbxdt7.vercel.app/14.png)

So in this way you can record users for restricted login 🔒.

### Designing a webpage 🖊️ - 

You should have a basic knowledge of:
- HTML
- CSS
- JavaScript

If you want to inspect the [Final Code](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/Loginauth) you can.

So at first, you need to set up a coding environment and I suggest you use [Repl.it](https://repl.it) as it sets everything for you.

It looks like this 👇

<a href="https://repl.it/languages/html"><img src="https://cloud-g2gwlwjtx.vercel.app/c2.png"></a>

#### Coding Part </>

##### HTML
When you take a look at the `index.html` file in your Repl, you'll see the `<html>` tag which is the root of the HTML file, and inside the `<html>` tag you'll see `<body>` tag which is the main body of HTML file or we can say it will contain all the main contents and here you will write your HTML code.

You will also find lines like:
- `<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>` which links your CSS file with the HTML. 

> - `<script src="script.js"></script>` which links JavaScript file with HTML and this should be place just above closing body tag `</body>`.

Reviewer: *your

    projectId: "loginauth-12",
    storageBucket: "loginauth-12.appspot.com",
    messagingSenderId: "308714255384",
    appId: "1:308714255384:web:98e87065f0e45910f0ff6d"
  };
  // Initialize Firebase
  firebase.initializeApp(firebaseConfig);
</script>
<script src="script.js"></script>
</body>
</html>
```

##### CSS
This is a `style.css` file present in your Repl just below `script.js`, which gives styles and designs to your webpage.

As you created two divisions in the HTML file, So you will add designs to it, and writing CSS is simple.

You just need to:
- Mention element/ class name/ ID.
- Open curly brackets `{`.
- Add styles.
- Close curly brackets `}`.

Here how you can add styles to your `<body>` tag:

```CSS
body {
  background: #000000;
  color: #fff;
  padding: 0px;
  margin: 0px;
  font-family: 'Nunito', sans-serif;
  font-size: 16px;
}
```
In this way, you can add styles to (Divisions/ IDs) and the whole webpage, Inspect my [CSS file](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/Loginauth#style.css)

You can select different colors from [Colour Picker](https://www.google.com/search?q=color+picker) to give your webpage an Attractive look.

> And also add fonts to your webpage, As I have added `Nunito` font as you can see a line of code in HTML `<head>`. You can choose fonts from [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/) and link them.

Author: its on repl.it final code and i didn't added on HTML snippet in README because we are on HTML, after that we move to CSS.

Add the below code to the `else` condition.

```javascript

document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";

```
So the code looks like:

```javascript
firebase.auth().onAuthStateChanged(function(user) {
  if (user) {
    // User is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";
  } else {
    // No user is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";
  }
});

```
Now after completing this you need to work on both the functions you assigned in HTML buttons `login()` and `logout()`.

- Function login()
As a user can sign-in only if their record is stored in Firebase. So, Firebase has a property called [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) as existing users can sign-in through input fields.

> Now you need to create two variables in `login()` function `userEmail` and `userPass` which get email and password values from the input fields with IDs `email_field` and `password_field`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you need to create two variables in `login()` named `userEmail` and `userPass` which get email and password values from the input fields with IDs `email_field` and `password_field`.
```

```javascript
function login(){

  var userEmail = document.getElementById("email_field").value;
  var userPass = document.getElementById("password_field").value;
}
```

> So in the above function, you need to add the [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So in the function above, you need to add the [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) property.
```

```javascript
firebase.auth().signInWithEmailAndPassword(email, password).catch(function(error) {
  // Handle Errors here.
  var errorCode = error.code;
  var errorMessage = error.message;
  // ...
});
```

> In the above code replace `email` with `userEmail` and `password` with `userPass` as you declared those variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the code above replace `email` with `userEmail` and `password` with `userPass`.
```

> Also, you need to display an error message when an error occurs like _wrong email or password_, So add the below code in the above function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You also need to display an error message when an error occurs like _wrong email or password_, So add the below code in the above function.
```

```javascript
window.alert("Error : " + errorMessage);
```

> So, the code will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

So, your code should look like this:

```

```javascript
function login(){

  var userEmail = document.getElementById("email_field").value;
  var userPass = document.getElementById("password_field").value;

  firebase.auth().signInWithEmailAndPassword(userEmail, userPass).catch(function(error) {
    // Handle Errors here.
    var errorCode = error.code;
    var errorMessage = error.message;

    window.alert("Error : " + errorMessage);

    // ...
  });

}
```
- Function logout()

For logout add below code below the login().

```javascript
function logout(){
  firebase.auth().signOut();
}
```

> Here is your final JavaScript code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is your final JavaScript code:

```

```javascript
firebase.auth().onAuthStateChanged(function(user) {
  if (user) {
    // User is signed in.

    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";

  } 

  else {
    // No user is signed in.

    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";

  }
});

function login(){

  var userEmail = document.getElementById("email_field").value;
  var userPass = document.getElementById("password_field").value;

  firebase.auth().signInWithEmailAndPassword(userEmail, userPass).catch(function(error) {
    // Handle Errors here.
    var errorCode = error.code;
    var errorMessage = error.message;

    window.alert("Error : " + errorMessage);

    // ...
  });

}

function logout(){
  firebase.auth().signOut();
}

```

> Yayyy🎊! you Finished with the coding part!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yayyy 🎊! You are finished with the coding part! 
```

Reviewer 2: @tanishq-soni just make this one last change and then we are good!

> Try login with the EMAIL and PASSWORD you recorded in Firebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try logging in with the EMAIL and PASSWORD you recorded in Firebase. If it worked you should be all set!
```

### Hooray!🎉 
You finished the Web Login Authentication Workshop by completing all tasks:
- [x] Creating a Firebase project.

> - [x] Connecting Firebase to your webpage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [x] Connecting Firebase to your webpage.
```

- [x] Designing a webpage.

### ⚡ What's Next?

> Now you know how to build a web page with login authentication using Firebase.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Now, how you can expand it? Try adding some other features to it with the help of [Firebase Guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start?authuser=0)

Here are some examples 👇
- Adding `create account` feature, So the user can create a new account.
- Adding the `Email verification` feature.
- Adding the `Anonymous Login` feature, So the user can visit the page without login.

#### ⭐ Live examples with code -

##### Create Account

> In this feature, you can type email and password of your own choice and click on `create an account`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this feature, you can type an email and password of your choice and click on `create an account`.
```

- [Live example](https://loginauthcreateaccount.tanishqsoni.repl.co/)
- [Code](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/loginauthcreateaccount)

##### Email verification

> In this feature, you can send verification mail to verify your account after login.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this feature, you can send a verification email to verify your account after login.
```

---
name: 'Web Login Authentication'
description: 'Build a secure web login page using FIREBASE'
author: '@tanishq-soni'
---

# Web Login Authentication 🔒

> In this workshop you'll build a secure web login page using [FIREBASE](https://firebase.google.com/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this workshop you'll build a secure web login page using [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/).
```

You will make something like this 👇

![live gif](https://cloud-7782l8k04.vercel.app/loginv2.gif)

> [Live Example](https://loginauth-12.web.app)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Check out this demo of the final product!](https://loginauth-12.web.app)
```

> Try live example using:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can test out the demo site using the following crediantals :

```

> - EMAIL-`login@authentication.com`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Email - `login@authentication.com`
```

> - PASSWORD-`password`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Password - `password`
```

## Getting Started :rocket:

> ### Creating a FIREBASE project 💻 -

Reviewer 3: `FIREBASE` should be `Firebase` every where

https://firebase.google.com/brand-guidelines

> At first you will need to sign-in to [FIREBASE](https://firebase.google.com/), if you have google account then you can directly sign-in to FIREBASE otherwise create one.

Reviewer 3: capitalise Google

> At first you will need to sign-in to [FIREBASE](https://firebase.google.com/), if you have google account then you can directly sign-in to FIREBASE otherwise create one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At first you will need to sign in to [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/), if you have Google account then you can directly sign-in to Firebase otherwise create one.
```

> After sign-in you will see an interface like image below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After signing in you will see a page similar to this:
```

});
```

In the code above `block` will display the division and `none` will hide it.

You added the part for the signed-in user so you now need the `else` part. This is where the user isn't signed in. The code will be the same as the code in the first `if` but you need to swap `block` and `none` to display only `main_div` with ID `login_div`.

Add the following code to the `else` condition:

```javascript
document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";
```

The javaScript code should look like:

```javascript
firebase.auth().onAuthStateChanged(function(user) {
  if (user) {
    // User is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";
  } else {
    // No user is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";
  }
});
```
Now, how it looks like:

![with JS](https://cloud-e3wysrojq.vercel.app/c1.png)

Now you need to work on both the functions you assigned to HTML buttons (`login()` and `logout()`).

##### Function login()

> A user can sign-in only if their record is stored in Firebase. So, firebase has a property called [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) as existing users can sign-in through input fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A user can sign-in only if their record is stored in Firebase. Firebase has a property called [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) which can sign in existing users through input fields.
```

> Now you need to create two variables in `login()` named `userEmail` and `userPass` which get email and password values from the input fields with IDs `email_field` and `password_field`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you need to create two variables in `login()` named `userEmail` and `userPass`. They get email and password values from the input fields with IDs `email_field` and `password_field`.
```

```javascript
function login(){

  var userEmail = document.getElementById("email_field").value;
  var userPass = document.getElementById("password_field").value;
}
```

> So in the function above, you need to add the [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So in the function above you need to add the [`Sign-in existing user`](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start#sign_in_existing_users) property.
```

Reviewer 2: Add the property to what?

```javascript
firebase.auth().signInWithEmailAndPassword(email, password).catch(function(error) {
  // Handle Errors here.
  var errorCode = error.code;
  var errorMessage = error.message;
  // ...
});

> ```

Reviewer 2: You need an explanation of what this is beforehand. If it is line 367 then you need to change it to describe a function call to the `signInWithEmailAndPassword` function.

In the code above replace `email` with `userEmail` and `password` with `userPass`.

> You also need to display an error message when an error occurs like _wrong email or password_, so add the below code in the above function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You also need to display an error message when an error occurs like _wrong email or password_, so add the code below in the above function.
```

Reviewer 2: Detail if the reader should be adding it to the function call of `signInWithEmailAndPassword` or the body of the `login` function.

```javascript
window.alert("Error : " + errorMessage);
```

> So, your code should look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So your code should look like this:
```

```javascript
function login(){

  var userEmail = document.getElementById("email_field").value;
  var userPass = document.getElementById("password_field").value;

  firebase.auth().signInWithEmailAndPassword(userEmail, userPass).catch(function(error) {
    // Handle Errors here.
    var errorCode = error.code;
    var errorMessage = error.message;

    window.alert("Error : " + errorMessage);

    // ...
  });

}
```
##### Function logout()

> For logout add this code below the login().

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For logout add the following code below the login function:
```

```javascript
function logout(){
  firebase.auth().signOut();
}
```

Here is your final JavaScript code:

```javascript
firebase.auth().onAuthStateChanged(function(user) {
  if (user) {
    // User is signed in.

    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";

  } 

  else {
    // No user is signed in.

    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";

  }
});

function login(){

  var userEmail = document.getElementById("email_field").value;
  var userPass = document.getElementById("password_field").value;

  firebase.auth().signInWithEmailAndPassword(userEmail, userPass).catch(function(error) {
    // Handle Errors here.
    var errorCode = error.code;
    var errorMessage = error.message;

    window.alert("Error : " + errorMessage);

    // ...
  });

}

function logout(){
  firebase.auth().signOut();
}

```

> It looks like this 👇

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your website should look like this 👇
```

![live](https://cloud-meubu1zac.vercel.app/0login_2.1.gif)

> Try logging in with the email and password you stored in Firebase. If it worked, you should be all set!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try logging in with the email and password you stored in Firebase. If it worked you should be all set!
```

> As you can see, the main goal of this workshop is completed here, but to make your webpage look cool, you need to add some custom CSS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see, the main goal of this workshop is completed here. To make your webpage look cool you need to add some custom CSS.
```

#### CSS
The `style.css` file present in your repl just below `script.js` gives styles and designs to your webpage.

> As you created two divisions in the HTML file, so you will add designs to it, and writing CSS is simple.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

You just need to:
- Mention element/ class name/ ID.
- Open curly brackets  `{`.
- Add styles.
- Close curly brackets  `}` .

Here how you can add styles to your `<body>` tag:

```CSS
body {
  background: #000000;
  color: #fff;
  padding: 0px;
  margin: 0px;
  font-family: 'Nunito', sans-serif;
  font-size: 16px;
}
```

> This way you can add styles to divisions, ids, the whole webpage. Inspect my [CSS file](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/Loginauth#style.css).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This way you can add styles to divisions, ids, and the whole webpage. Inspect my [CSS file](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/Loginauth#style.css).
```

You can select different colors from a [color picker](https://www.google.com/search?q=color+picker) to give your webpage a cool colorful look.

> If you need help regarding the various keywords used in CSS, you can go through the [CSS documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need help regarding the various keywords used in CSS you can go through the [CSS documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference).
```

> Yayyy 🎊! You are done with the coding part! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yayyy 🎊! You are done!!
```

> Take a look at [Final Code](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/Loginauth).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Take a look at the [final code](https://repl.it/@tanishqsoni/Loginauth).
```

## Hooray!🎉 
You finished the Web Login Authentication Workshop by completing all tasks:
- [x] Creating a Firebase project.
- [x] Connecting Firebase to your webpage.
- [x] Designing a webpage.

## ⚡ What's Next?

> Now, how you can expand it? Try adding some other features to it with the help of [Firebase Guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start?authuser=0)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, how you can expand it? Try adding some other features to it with the help of the [Firebase Guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/auth/web/start?authuser=0)
```

Here are some examples 👇

> - `create account` feature, so the user can create a new account.
> - `Email verification` feature.
> - `Anonymous Login` feature, so the user can visit the page without login.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `create account` feature so a user can create a new account.
- `Email verification` feature.
- `Anonymous Login` feature so a user can visit the page without login.
```

---
name: 'Web Login Authentication'
description: 'Build a secure web login page using Firebase'
author: '@tanishq-soni'
---

# Web Login Authentication 🔒

In this workshop, you'll build a secure web login page using [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/).

Firebase is a platform developed by Google for creating mobile and web applications.

You will make something like this 👇

![live gif](https://cloud-7782l8k04.vercel.app/loginv2.gif)

[Check out this demo of the final product!](https://Loginauth.tanishqsoni.repl.co)

You can test out the demo site using the following credentials:

- Email: `login@authentication.com`
- Password: `password`

### Getting Started 🚀

To get started, you should have a basic knowledge of:
- HTML
- CSS
- JavaScript

So let's begin 💨

## Creating a Firebase project 💻
First, you will need to [sign in to Firebase](https://firebase.google.com/) using a Google account. If you don't have one, you can [create one here](https://accounts.google.com/signup).

After signing in, you will see a page similar to this:

![Firebase landing](https://cloud-mketa8pxq.vercel.app/1.png)

> In the image above, you'll see the `Go to console` button at the top right corner. Click on that, and you will be redirected to the console section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the image above, you'll see the `Go to console` button at the top right corner. Click on that, you will be redirected to the console section.
```

![Project page](https://cloud-kfr44a6da.vercel.app/2.png)

> In the console section, you'll see all your Firebase projects and the `Add Project` button. Click on it to create a project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the console section, you'll see all your Firebase projects and the `Add Project` button. Click on it to create a new project.
```

  };
  // Initialize Firebase
  firebase.initializeApp(firebaseConfig);
</script>
```
Here is an **important** step, look at very first line of code:

`<script src="https://www.gstatic.com/firebasejs/7.19.1/firebase-app.js"></script>`.

This will give you an error, as it only integrates the `Firebase-app`, not the Firebase library. So for that, add this below the first line.

`<script src="https://www.gstatic.com/firebasejs/4.8.1/firebase.js"></script>`.

After adding it, this should be your code:

```javascript
<script src="https://www.gstatic.com/firebasejs/7.19.1/firebase-app.js"></script>
<script src="https://www.gstatic.com/firebasejs/4.8.1/firebase.js"></script>
<script>
  // Your web app's Firebase configuration
  var firebaseConfig = {
    apiKey: "AIzaSyAVNeXl4cBro95I3dFWMaiT2rI88sqyBtc",
    authDomain: "loginauth-12.firebaseapp.com",
    databaseURL: "https://loginauth-12.firebaseio.com",
    projectId: "loginauth-12",
    storageBucket: "loginauth-12.appspot.com",
    messagingSenderId: "308714255384",
    appId: "1:308714255384:web:98e87065f0e45910f0ff6d"
  };
  // Initialize Firebase
  firebase.initializeApp(firebaseConfig);
</script>
```

> So, paste the code above right after the second division.

Author: The code right above (as we modified from the saved).

So in the above code, some changes have to be made.

Add below two lines of code in the `if` condition of the above code.

```javascript
document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";
```

The code should look like this:

```javascript
firebase.auth().onAuthStateChanged(function(user) {
  if (user) {
    // User is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";
  } else {
    // No user is signed in.
  }
});
```

In the code above, `block` will display the division, and `none` will hide it.

As you added this for a signed-in user, you also need the `else` part. _where user is not signed-in_ means the user is on the login page, so the code will be the same as the code above, but you need to swap `block` and `none` to display only `main_div` with ID `login_div`.

Add this code to the `else` condition.

```javascript
document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";
```

> The code should look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The javaScript code should look like:
```

```javascript
firebase.auth().onAuthStateChanged(function(user) {
  if (user) {
    // User is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "block";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "none";
  } else {
    // No user is signed in.
    document.getElementById("user_div").style.display = "none";
    document.getElementById("login_div").style.display = "block";
  }
});
```
Now, how it looks like:

![with JS](https://cloud-e3wysrojq.vercel.app/c1.png)

> After completing this, you need to work on both the functions you assigned in HTML buttons `login()` and `logout()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you need to work on both the functions you assigned to HTML buttons (`login()` and `logout()`).
```

> ##### Function login()

Reviewer 2: @tanishq-soni I still have to review the rest but this should be a good start.

Author: sure np!
